# Seminar on 29 June 2021

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__  Taylor's Principles of Scientific Management
* __Presenter:__ Stefan Grote

## Abstract

Frederick Winslow Taylor's book "The Principles of Scientific Management"
(1911) was one of the first publications about systematic organisational
measures to increase productivity.

Taylors four principles of scientific management are:

(1) Find the “one-best-way” to do something.

(2) Train the workers to do that exact method over and over again.

(3) Supervise and check the work using different methods.

(4) Management's responsibility for the appropriateness of the measures.

The rules apply only to a specifically organised mass production and are on
the threshold of the transition to assembly line production with "scientific
organisation" and extensive dissection of work processes.

They appear historically as both a reaction to group dynamic processes in the
workforce itself to resist high workload and a form of contradiction between
blue collar and white collar workers in the workforce itself.

## Material

* [Handout](Handout.pdf)
* [Slides](Slides.pdf)

## Notes

Taylor's approach throws a spotlight on practical production-organisational
developments and their reflection in the early phase of the 20th century.

We are faced with a beginning production-organisational differentiation, which
in the further course leads to the formation of the professions of _engineer_
and _manager_. Both professions are (well-paid) wage labourers in the sense
that they are usually don't own the companies for which they work.

The emergence of the _Principles of Scientific Management_ is embedded in the
technological upheavals of that time, which led to the devaluation of previous
private processual skills (the "rules of thumb"). New processual skills are to
be built up. In that context the "scientific" methods that have been
successful applied in the technical field are also to be applied to the
organisation of production. In contrast to the scientific background
knowledge, on which engineering solutions were formed and based in depth at
that time, such a background did not exist in the production-organisational
context. Taylor therefore generalised above all his own
production-organisational experiences within the context of an increasing
algorithmisation of production.

This strenghtens the production-organisational description form. Weights shift
from the workers' private processual skills to institutionalised procedural
methods. Applying such methods it is assumed that only a small amount of
conditioning for workers is required, i.e. a short training is sufficient in
order to make them work in the "living organisation".

This marginalises the essential feedback loop between justified expectations
and experienced results at the base of the individual worker and shifts it to
the cooperative space of action of the enterprise as a whole. There, the two
professions - engineer and manager - take over the coordination of this
feedback at the technical and production-organisational level.

It is also noteworthy that these differentiations have their roots in the
differentiation within wage labour itself in the second half of the 19th
century. Taylor begins as a foreman in a steel plant, knows very well the
motives and methods of his colleagues to resist too much work pressure and
ultimately acts against them with his methodical approach. The differentiation
of professions thus leads to contradictory tensions in the workforce itself,
which later also experience a conceptual consolidation in the distinction
between _blue collar_ and _white collar_.

Taylor's principles are to be considered on the plane of the further
development of organisation of production. With the emergence of an assembly
line society, the division of the production-organisational process continues
and the processual skills of a largely unskilled workforce are les and less
important. In addition to the _profession_ for the few, there is now also the
_job_ for the many.

With the invention of the computer, this "trivialisation of production" is
pushed even further on the one hand and culminates today in the image of the
automatic "Factory 4.0", in which the renitent element of humans can
apparently be completely eliminated. On the other hand, the increasing
technisation of production leads to a revitalisation of suitable non-trivial
"processual skills". As simple tasks are more and more carried out by
automated systems, this aspect is gaining in importance again.

##  From the Chat

Graebe, Hans-Gert :

- Why is this called "scientific management"? Which concept of "science" does
  it reference?
  - Kleemann : It refers in a pseudo-scientific way to
    physiological-psychological theories of mental processes developed at that
    time (end of 19th century) mainly in Germany (Wundt and others), that were
    taught in the upcoming American universities at that time.
  - Gräbe: It uses the reputation of "science" in the rapidly growing area of
    technology at that time. In this sense, it is a matter of transferring a
    conceptual system that has been successfully developed in the technical
    field to contexts later referred to as sociological.
  - Kleemann : [Alexei Gastev](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aleksei_Gastev):
    Poetry of the Workman's blow appeared in 1918 in the USSR - and does the
    same scientific "management theory and research" to coordinate production
    in the Soviet Union in the twenties and thirties. Gastew's Central
    Institute of Labour worked closely with Pavlov and they also wanted such a
    division of labour to include unskilled workers.
  - Gräbe: Many parallels, but also differences in motivation: "Revolution for
    Gastev meant empowering workers by allowing them to control everyday
    matters related to work-processes."
    ([Source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aleksei_Gastev)). Note that these
    activities were triggered at that time not by the company owners but by
    skilled workers. There seems to be a strong turning point of
    differentiations in "blue collars" and "white collars" where later on grew
    out the profession of a manager.

- Why is the foreman opposed to the workers in those days? Is the foreman the
  prototype of the later manager?

- Workers as "experts". How did this develop further? See below.

- Management as art, craft, science? Engineering activity? 
  - This question remains yet open (see also "Mintzberg on Management").

- "Work as fast as possible, but not faster". What is the measure of how fast
  a concrete job can be done?
  - Here it became obvious that standardised work must be measured against a
    socially average necessary standard, at least in the market segment in
    which this work is productively used. This is tried to be undermined with
    Taylor's Principles, norming and with Adolf Hennecke (link below) also in
    a socialistic context.  The workers have already understood under Taylor
    that to counteract requires to be in solidarity with each other.

- To what extent does the possibility of high work performance depend on
  production-organisational conditions over which the worker has only limited
  influence?  
  - See the example of
    [Adolf Hennecke](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adolf_Hennecke) in the
    early days of the GDR or the reference to the Russian prototype
    [Stakhanov](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexey_Stakhanov)
  - This is another side of the problem, how far it is possible to compensate
    for disturbances of the processes from outside in the system itself.


- Planning and precise instructions devaluate the worker's experience (and
  ultimately lead to the image of a "trained gorilla" on the assembly line).
  This image of a modern factory is that of a machine that runs well and
  reliably.
  - With devaluation of the worker's experience a feedback loop between
    justified expectations and experienced results is replaced by a one-way
    relation of command and control.

- To what extent is management also subject to "scientific management"?
  - Once more: Only the "workman" is "scientifically managed". 

- Transition from flat wages to piecework wages. What are the economic
  consequences? Role of norming in this concept.
  
  - Piecework is a form of stricter clocking of the production organisation.
    Whereas with piecework the option remains to work slower and earn less,
    this changes with the assemly line. It prescribes work speeds and can run
    faster or slower. The main point ist not to pressure on the workman but to
    have a specific systemic rhythm that can be synchronised with neighboring
    systems.  The same applies to the clock rate of a computer.

- What categories of "workman" can be distinguished today (besides manager and
  expert)?
