# Seminar on 04 May 2021

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__  Management by Incentive
* __Presenter:__ Veronika Heuten

## Abstract

In the presentation, various approaches will be presented on how incentives
can be used to achieve greater conformity between the objectives of an
organization and that of the people involved in it. A distinction is made
between material and immaterial incentives, as well as incentives with an
emergent effect in the organization (collective agreements, working
atmosphere, etc.), which have a uniform effect on the entire workforce, and
incentives tailored to specific individuals in order to recognize special
commitment, whereby the latter incentives also contain emergent moments due to
their exemplary effect.

## Material

* [Handout](Handout.pdf) 
* [Slides](Slides.pdf) 

## Notes 

In the presentation and discussion, it became clear that incentives offer a
very comprehensive toolbox to improve the fit and performance of "human
resources" (HR) in an organization, but that this requires a very precise
understanding of the __places__ in the organization where these HR are
"docking" with the organization. We identified these places earlier as
__roles__ and _role descriptions_ in the context of the organization's
structure and process description. If role-specific effects are to be achieved
through incentives, both the specificity of the role and the specificity of
the person to take that role must be considered. Accordingly, for incentives
with emergent effects, the strategic goals of the organization are a
determinant component. Somewhat underexposed remained the question that
incentives presuppose the _availability_ of corresponding resources in the
company, i.e., they presuppose a (ultimately financial) _throughput_ through
the company (as a system) in order to be able to influence the efficiency of
the use of resources with this management instrument. In this sense,
management by incentives is a management instrument "of abundance".

## From the Chat

Graebe, Hans-Gert :

- Reward = Incentive (is this the same?). Incentives for what? Given goals are 
  not questioned.  Who is the subject that sets incentives?
  - The last question (about the subject) is central for a systematic
    management theory, since incentives are (in the TRIZ terminology) a _tool_
    in the hand of the _management organ_ to stimulate role owners.
  - TRIZ minimal machine: (incentive) -> (stimulates) -> (role owner).

- Shchedrovitsky: "Organizations do not have goals, only people have goals" -
  stresses "Living organization" is in motion, i.e. its goals are evolving
  too?
  - This (difference between a formal organization and its "living
    counterpart" in the sense of [MSM, p. 30] concerning that aspect) was not
    further discussed.

- Bonus - wage supplement, but unlike wages, this is agreed _afterwards_ and not
  _in beforehand_.
  - This deep value-theoretical question was not touched either. 
  - Jannis de Riz : Bonuses are variable salaries I would say.  And therefore
    more incentive than a fixed salary, which is paid in advance.
    - Salary is not paid in advance but _agreed_ in advance, but the main
      point ist that it does not depend upon the real performance of the
      organization. By the way this is a little bit different with wages that
      are paid per processed item and not per time.

- Material incentives (company own cafeteria, kindergarden) - infrastructure
  benefits. How is infrastructure financed?
  - A clear distinction between direct incentives and indirect incentives as
    investment in infrastructure is rerquired. 

- Cultural incentives (good climate, nice colleagues) - also infrastructure,
  but different from material incentives. Both _emergent_ properties of the
  whole organization.
  - This are strong moments but it is not clear what are the measures in
    systematic management to achieve such conditions. Hence the question
    arises whether it is justified to subsume that under "management by
    incentives".

- Incentive as a means of control and management. Distinguish subject (the
  controller) and object (the controlled)?  Does Shchedrovitsky's distinction
  between leadership and management play a role here?

- How does payment for labour work? Marx: "Average necessary labour",
  i.e. "money against time", but time is a complicated notion here.
  - Payment for work played a central role in the argumentation, in particular
    the pay ratio between management and workers. But a thorough labour value
    theory was not addressed.

- pay ratio: How is this difference in "hourly rates" to be understood
  theoretically? It is not only a problem between "manager" and "worker", but
  also with (highly paid) "experts".
  - What's about a justification of such differences from a theoretical point
    of view, e.g. within a labour value theory?  Marx counts "complicated
    work" as "multiplied work", hence has a build in "pay ratio".

- Geneva scheme - how this relates to the role concept? Role is separation of
  requirements and private skills, which management has to bring together
  "just in time" in the production workflow.  "Skill" and "load capacity"
  (from the Geneva scheme) are two aspects, but concrete role concepts are
  much more detailed.

- Overview by Christian Scholz (slide 15) - can this be taken seriously?
  Hasn't every generation gone through the phases Z - Y - X - 0?

- Daniel Werner : Shchedrovitsky: "Organizations don't have goals, only people
  have goals" -> it is quite normal for the working population to see the
  management level as a closed organization, although it is of course made up
  of people.
  - Management as "organization within the organization"?  

- Kleemann : system and system: in the sense of order this is systematic - in
  the sense of system this is a construction kit of elements and not of
  elements in a relation ordered in itself.

- Kleemann : role as an access for relating the elements.
  - "Business role is a group of related skills with a level of authority to
    perform a given task. This includes all task types whether they are a
    manual or system enabled".
    <https://www.heflo.com/definitions/business-role/>    
  - Addendum: Roles have role descriptions and formal requirements to ensure
    that the role owner is very likely able to take on the responsibilities
    associated with the role. In particular that requirement may be a formal
    certified qualification.

- Kleemann : which identification and sense of justice as ideas of belonging,
  so crucial how management not only applies methods but sees and executes
  production in corporate identety design

- Kleemann : ---def: throughput through the system
  - For organizations some basic ideas in that direction (transformation of
    "monetary energy" in "social energy") are developed in
    <https://hg-graebe.de/EigeneTexte/DAT-20-en.pdf>

