# Seminar on 01 June 2021

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__  The S.M.A.R.T. Approach
* __Presenter:__ Axel Schuster

## Abstract

The S.M.A.R.T. Approach is an attempt to standardize the writing of effective
objectives, to establish a controlled workflow and therefore to ease
management in the sense of Management by Objectives. One of the main problems
of this approach is, that there is no standardized definition of it.

The acronym of S.M.A.R.T. objectives might have occurred the first time in an
publication of George T. Doran who claimed that most managers still don’t know
what ”objectives are and how they can be written” and that ”characteristic of
management excellence is a climate in which company officers and managers talk
in terms of objectives” and therefore makes arguments for a standardized and
effective way to write objectives. He argues that the S.M.A.R.T. Approach can
fulfill this task and also describes requirements of an organization in form
of salary structure and job fit to fully realize the potential of this method.

Doran introduced S.M.A.R.T. as the acronym meaning Specific, Measurable,
Assignable, Realistic, Time-Related but one of the more common ones is used in
the form of Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, Time-Bound.

## Material

* [Handout](Handout.pdf)
* [Slides](Slides.pdf)

## Notes

One of the central questions of the discussion was once again the relationship
between description and execution forms in the context of management action.
SMART comes with the claim to support managers in formulating effective
objectives.  Like comparable approaches, it is a _methodological handout_ that
has to be tailored to the domain-specific context of management planning in
order to produce context-specific management tools and documents for
management action (description level), which then have to prove themselves
efficient in the concrete practice of management action.

Of these three levels, the lowest on of special management action is
ultimately decisive for practical performance. The other two levels - that of
a special management strategy and that of the methodological foundation of
such a strategy - clearly move on at two more comprehensive spatio-temporal
scales. This suggests that three system levels are intertwined here.

The first system level is that of the manager with its assigned area of
responsibility and in which he or she represents an essential element of the
control component of that system. In addition to a primarily output-oriented
view of "objectives", such a system also needs an _external throughput_ to
function, which must be guaranteed by the system environment. In this sense,
the manager in that system has not only an inwardly directed _control
function_, but also an outwardly directed _security function_. The effect that
a system itself exerts an active influence on securing its conditions of
existence is under-illuminated in the management approaches considered so far.

This influence must be exerted and negotiated in the supersystem, in which the
management strategies are coordinated company-wide among the managers.  This
supersystem has not only a processual but also a structural dimension,
concerning available tools and institutionalisation. On the first system level
cooperative action appears primarily in a form based on the division of labour
as cooperation between the manager as individual leader and the domain experts
(to be understood here in a very broad interpretation) of the respective area
of application under secured resource throughput. On the second system level
it is about securing precisely this throughput of resources. The throughput,
which appears as a _contextual prerequisite_ on the first level, is the object
of management action on the second level in the sense of an overarching
primary "objective" to "keep the business running" as the first prerequisite
for any further strategic objective. These aspects link directly to the
debates a year ago (Gräbe/Kleemann 2020), (Holling 2001), (Foxon et al. 2009)
about resilience or systematic transformations of corporate contexts in which
this resilience has been exhausted. This goes far beyond SMART approaches and
thus marks an area of sufficiently "resilient" systems in which SMART
management action is even possible.

While at the lowest system level, management activities are primarily directed
towards operationally producing the expected output, at higher management
levels it is primarily a matter of reproducing the _ability_ to produce output
in the necessary quantity and quality.

ISO 9000 and CCMI are structured in such a way: They are not primarily about
_product quality_ of an operational output, but about _process quality_ in the
respective companies with the proviso that process quality is a necessary, but
not sufficient, prerequisite for product quality. Process quality, however,
includes appropriate management measures for product quality and thus builds
up a _feedback loop_ of quality experiences (positive and negative) on
production conditions, which in turn has an impact on process quality.

This raises the question how the SMART Approach fits into more complex
strategies of corporate development and the prerequisites that must be in
place for a fruitful implementation of the approach. At the same time, this
question relativises a context-free bashing of the methodology. Above we
identified the system of corporate development as the supersystem of the
system of operative control of the production. In this hierarhy the system of
cross-company methodologies, to which the SMART Approach belongs, is a
super-supersystem. It has in turn an effect primarily through feedback loops
in the system of corporate development. SMART is therefore not only and not so
much a methodological tool for individual managers to reflect on their own
management experience, but part of the organisation of a company-wide process
of applying the methodology. However, this presupposes that the activities in
the company are structured in such a way that SMART principles can be applied
at all. In CMMI, for example, this is only the case from level 2 onwards. In
addition to a cooperative feedback loop at system level 2 of the company-wide
management experiences, there is therefore another loop between the systematic
implementation of structural requirements and the increasing possibility of
effective use of the SMART principles themselves.

### Literature

* T.J. Foxon, M.S. Reed, L.C. Stringer (2009). Governing long‐term
  social–ecological change: what can the adaptive management and transition
  management approaches learn from each other? Environmental Policy and
  Governance, 19 (1), 3-20. <https://doi.org/10.1002/eet.496>
* H.-G. Gräbe, K. P. Kleemann (2020). Seminar Systemtheorie.  Rohrbacher
  Manuskripte, Heft 22. Berlin 2020.
  <https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:bsz:15-qucosa2-748430>  
* C.S. Holling (2001).  Understanding the Complexity of Economic, Ecological,
  and Social Systems. In: Ecosystems (2001) 4, 390–405.
  <https://www.esf.edu/cue/documents/Holling_Complexity-EconEcol-SocialSys_2001.pdf>


##  From the Chat

Ralf Laue : For those who are interested... I collected some time ago for a
lecture of my own:

- S: specific, simple, sensitive, significant
- M: measurable, meaningful, motivating
- A: achievable, agreed, attainable, action-oriented
- R: relevant, reasonable, realistic and resourced, results-based
- T: time bound, time-based, time limited, time/cost limited, timely,
  time-sensitive

Summary - a certain arbitrariness is already recognisable.

  - There is another list of different spellings of the five letters in the
    slides.  Nevertheless a sound question may ask, what are the
    _commonalities_ in each of the five conceptual sets. Here is a proposal: 
    - S: activity-centric
    - M: prepared for quantitative monitoring
    - A: the required throughput of resources is secured
    - R: relevant for the goal
    - T: structural units of activity are generally time bound

Graebe, Hans-Gert :

- What is the difference between goals (short term) and objectives (long
  term)?  Is it possible to make this conceptually clearer?
  - SHAMSA seems to see it the other way round. (Goal = strategic objective,
    Objectives = specific steps).
  - This was also the interpretation in the presentation. 

- Can we break down the 5 SMART terms again more precisely?
  - SMART objectives as efficient objectives. Are there SMART goals?  
    - An interesting question in the three levels system model developed in my
      notes. Should corporate development be oriented on SMART principles,
      since it is not about _production_ but about _reproduction_ (of the
      corporate structures)?
      
  - specific = specific area of improvement
    - Corresponds to TRIZ system and operational zone
    
  - measurable = What does measure mean?
    - In CMMI quantitative methods play a role in maturity level 4 only
      ("quantitatively managed"), when cross-company process templates have
      already been defined.  Only in such a cross-company setting there is a
      frame to learn from the collected data.

  - achievable = It is mainly about the (physical or mental) resources
    required for the activity.
    - How is the allocation of resources to be understood?
    - Who is responsible for the availability of resources?

  - relevant = Where does relevance come from?  
    - What is the relationship to other objectives?    
    - How is the link between goals and objectives established?
    - Does this have anything to do with BP modelling?

  - time-bound = inherent theme of every project (Any project has 3
    characteristics: goal, resources, time).
    - Do _goals_ also have a time-bound or only objectives?

- What does "_management_ by objectives" mean? So far only the _definition_ of
  objectives has been discussed, i.e. the description dimension. What is the
  connection to management as execution dimension?
  - This was one of the main insights: Management is about operation of _real_
    processes (Shchedrovitsky: "Only a moving system can be managed").  The
    different description forms (BP modelling as also talking about SMART) are
    only a supporting tool for the _real_ management.
  - See my notes above. 

- Job fit - how is this to be understood? Role concept as description of
  requirements. But how is matching organised? "Job" as a typical American
  term? Employees as _objects_ of management? A completely different approach
  compared to MBI?
  - What's about the idea of "cooperative action" at that level? 

- How is "value" of an employee determined? Doesn't it depend centrally on the
  _objectives_, which means that the "value" changes fundamentally when the
  objectives change?

- Every employee is a manager - so also Doran (at least if you plan making a
  career; experts only never make career). We have had this question before.
  How is the "value question" applied to the managers themselves?

- Make objectives as abstract as necessary.  What does "abstract" mean here?
  "Abstract" as in "abstract class"? But, as we know, they can't be
  instantiated.
  
  - Yes, in a similar meaning. "Abstract" means subject to tailoring, either
    at later time or as abstract building block in a company-wide set of
    process building block templates (e.g. V-Modell XT)
  
- How does this relate to BP Modelling and BPMN?

- Daniel Werner : It sounds like a complete rationalisation of the workplace.
  How long does an employee have to perform "poorly" for once to be demoted,
  replaced or even fired? This forces an absolute meritocracy, where not even
  acquired qualifications secure a job.  
  - This is a radical market-based view and may work on a supply-driven
    market, but has much problems on a demand-driven market of HR ("human
    resources").

- Jannis de Riz : But if I always keep all employees, even if their skills are
  no longer needed, then at some point I risk the employment of ALL employees
  because I go bankrupt paying salaries to people that do not "support" /
  "generate" throughput.  
  - This contradiction which resides on two different time scales has to be
    solved.  No easy answer, depends on the "resilience" status of the
    company.

- Daniel Werner : Without a feedback loop to the SMART Objectives (which are
  set by the manager himself) and since the manager can completely withdraw
  from this delegation process, the role of the "manager" appears here as an
  absolute, almost infallible entity.
