# Seminar on 22 June 2021

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__  The Toyota Management System
* __Presenter:__ Toni Pfeiffer

## Abstract

The presentation refers to the book ”The Toyota Way - 14 Management Principles
of the World’s Most Successful Automotive Company” by Jeffrey K. Liker.
Jeffrey Liker analyzed Toyota’s success and discovered 14 methods that enabled
Toyota to become the most successful automotive company in the world.

In order to understand the success of Toyota, it is necessary to look at the
history of the company which will be explained in more detail.  The Toyota
Production System, another component of success, will be described only
briefly. Here we focus on the management methods that describe Toyota’s
holistic approach. The individual principles were divided by Liker into 4
categories, also called the 4 P’s Philosophy, Processes, People/Partners and
Problem Solving. These categories can be thought of as a pyramid with 4
levels.  Problem solving is the top of the pyramid. The most important is the
foundation, the philosophy of the company. This philosophy runs through all
management levels and eras and started with the founding Toyoda family 80
years ago.

## Material

* [Handout](Handout.pdf)
* [Slides](Slides.pdf)

## Notes

The Toyota Management System, like other management approaches, has its roots
at the turn of the 20th century. Management thus appears as a specific form of
differentiation of an industrial production process whose beginnings lie in
the second half of the 19th century. The essential prerequisites for this were

- the production-technical provision of energy sources, which in their power
  went far beyond the previously available human and animal energy sources,

- the mass production of standardised intermediate products and semi-finished
  goods on the basis of advancing scientific and technical knowledge
  (e.g. iron processing and steel production in the second half of the 19th
  century),

- the inventive use of these new principles of action and materials in new,
  standardised products suitable for the mass market.

This unfolding industrial mode of production was shaped in many places by new
entrepreneurial personalities who were distinguished by both technical
expertise and entrepreneurial skill and thus combined two essential components
of economic success - access to generally available procedural knowledge as
private processual skills and a feeling for market demand - which later
diverged in the professions of engineer and manager. However, in the
biographical literature, engineering requirements and their scientific
foundations are in the foreground; there is no mention of special management
techniques developed and generalised at that time.

This was also the case with Toyoda senior and Henry Ford around 1900. However,
there was the challenge for the scientific methods so successfully applied in
the technical field also to be applied to business organisation.  The vision
was to organise a factory to run as well and smoothly as a machine.

The systemtheoretically founded principles of hierarchical composition of a
whole as organising the functional interaction of viable components as design
principle of technical artefacts were transferred to the organisation of
production. However, in that situation the principles are not to be applied in
a constructive way as in the _design_ of a machine, but as a _reorganisation_
of an already viable business system, a "living organisation". Among all
components of such a business system the "human" component turned out to be
the most unwieldy and least accessible to "specification-compliant
functioning".

Major transitions in this direction in the first quarter of the 20th century
are primarily associated with the names Frederick Taylor and Henry Ford. Ford
went over to work at assembly lines with his car factory as early as 1913 and
thus to a highly disaggregated form of organisation of production.
Interestingly (according to Wikipedia), the initiative for this reorganisation
did not come from Ford himself, but from employees of the Ford Motor Company.

Fordism is also usually associated with a second insight, that the entire
economic cycle requires not only supply but also demand with purchasing power
in order to close the product cycle and thus also the capital cycle.  This
requires an appropriate wage policy. In this way, labour turnover can also be
dampened and thus important private processual skills can be kept in the
company. Of course, this is only possible if corresponding profits are
generated in the company, i.e. if the systemic context ensures not only the
throughput of energy and material, but also of capital.

We had already studied such management approaches several times in the
seminar. They are repeated here to highlight similarities and contrasts with
the Toyota system. The Toyota Motor Corporation, which started car production
in 1936, was not only in competition with General Motors and the Ford Motor
Company, which dominated the American car market of the time, but also in
tension with the first emerging American management theories based mostly on
_structural_ production-organisational approaches. Toyota, on the other hand,
relies on a _process-oriented_ model of _networking_ systemic approaches. This
becomes particularly visible in the principle of "just in time". The
throughput of a _resource_ to be guaranteed in a system as a contextual
condition is coupled to the _resource provision process_ ("the right part at
the right time in the right amount") of another system. In this approach, the
focus is on the networked structure of flows of interweaving processes and
thus the coordination of cycles and clockings instead of static structures and
a stronger orientation towards quantities. The Toyota Management System and
the closely related Total Quality Management (TQM) approach differ
significantly in their model-theoretical approaches to process modelling,
which is reflected, for example, in the different guidelines ISO 9001 (for
classical process models) and ISO 9004 (for TQM-based process models).

It remains open how such a process oriented coordination works beyond the
boundaries of the company.  For example, the expansion of a worldwide digital
shipment tracking system resulting in completely new networking possibilities
in the area of Supply Chain Management (SCM) for just-in-time production is
currently confronted with increasing real-world logistical problems due to
disruptions in connection with the Corona pandemic. Forms of description and
execution forms are in tension. However, major problems do not arise _within_
the individual systems of logistics or production, but _at their interface_.
Short-term real-world disruptions in the logistics chain can be communicated,
but they influence real-world execution of longer-term planning in production,
which in turn has impact on the distribution chain. Such problems at the
interface of two systems - the _resource demand_ of production and the
_resource provision_ by logistics - the disruption of coordinated rhythms -
must be intercepted by corresponding robustness of the production organisation
of the target system to avoid further propagation to other systems. The Toyota
system of exhausting all productive reserves has therefore its limits.

The whole relies on the stabilisation of existing systemic processes _and_ the
stabilisation of their interaction. Gradual changes are possible above all in
stable environments and thus in a context that is today much associated with
the term _resilience_.  One question remains: How does such the Toyota System
handle more disruptive change management, e.g. caused by deep technological
changes as the Digital Change?

##  From the Chat

- Father Toyoda - what role does the generation of inventors and entrepreneurs
  around the turn of the century 1900 (as well as Werner Siemens) play in the
  formation of today's management structures?
  - For some thoughts see the notes above.

- In contrast to previous approaches, the Toyota approach focuses on
  organisational development and not only on management of people. The complex
  system of rules is part of a "cooperate identity", which has a massive
  ideological effect in the sense of homogenising goals throughout the
  organisation.

- Toyota House - Unity of Parts. To what extent does this realise
  Shchedrovitsky's approach "The whole and its parts" (Shch.: A living
  organism cannot be broken down into parts, only a dead organism; breaking it
  down into parts and putting them together to form the whole provides a
  different whole)?  Toyota rule 12 on developmental approach is a specific
  approach to the second problem. Hegel? Learning organisation. Subject
  formation at the level of cooperative structure?
  - Ken Kleemann argued substantially against such parallels, since Hegel's
    whole dialectical approach does not occur here, but the development models
    of the Toyota Management System are essentially only applicable to linear
    developments in stable contexts.

- Just in time - interplay of resource and resource management categories.
  - See the explanation in the notes section.

- Pyramid of the four levels - to what extent do systems theory approaches
  play a role here?

- Philosophy - socio-cultural approach, but is an external effect (export
  functions of the system), also Toyota rule 11 on networks. This is also
  about management of external relations over which one has no direct
  management influence.

- Elimination of waste - internally the process dimension stands above the
  structure dimension.  Shchedrovitsky criticises "classical" approaches for
  not having a clear concept of process.  TRIZ also has difficulties with the
  concept of flows.  
  - The emphasis on the process dimension and a consistent discussion of its
    interconnectedness is a distinctive feature of the Toyota Management
    System compared to other management theories.

- Pull system means a massive coupling of the parts of the whole system.  How
  does structuring work in such an approach?

- Quality immediately - corresponds to the rule known from QA in computer
  science that early detection and elimination of errors saves costs. (Errors
  propagate like avalanches if they are not recognised).

- How does Toyota deal with undetected errors? This is the main problem in
  classical systems.

- "Engineer on site who knows the process best". This refers to decisions on
  technological processes. What about larger administrative processes? How are
  those influenced in terms of design and who decides that?  Chief engineer,
  middle and strategic management? Relationship between acquisition,
  purchasing and production?  See also the Toyota principle on Leaders Scheme.

- Toyota principle 10 People: Shchedrovitsky also distinguishes between group
  and organisational unit.  Here an attempt is made to shape the
  organisational unit into a group. However, here there are reproducing
  contradictions between the goals of the individuals and the goals of the
  organisational unit.

- Decision-making: Justified expectations vs. experienced rsults. The
  principle of consensual decision-making is also known from open source:
  "Rough consensus and running code". To what extent does this play a role
  here?

- Troubleshooting: TRIZ knows RCA+ (root cause analysis) as a method of
  analysis.  The approach is methodological, how is it linked with
  domain-specific aspects, which is essential for solving concrete problems?

- CMMI level 5 knows troubleshooting _and_ change management.
