# Seminar on 13 July 2021

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__  Anton Kozhemyako. Contradictory Business Processes and Schematization 
* __Presenter:__ Lukas Heink

## Abstract

In his thesis, Anton Kozhemyako develops a series of terms in the field of
business system modelling that critically contrast with common terms that have
been developed for 20 years in the field of Business TRIZ. Some aspects of
this are presented here.

## Material

* [Handout](Handout.pdf)
* [Slides](Slides.pdf)

## Notes

In the course of our seminar we observed that the term "management",
especially as a profession in its own right, emerged only in the course of the
20th century. Moreover, we established a close connection to the growing
penetration of production processes by technology thus deepening the division
of labour. Like the technical development in the 20th century, these
production-organisational innovations did not form a linear process, but were
characterised by at least two upheavals - the transition to assembly line
production and a largely increasing degree of dissection of work processes
since the 1930s, and digitally based measurement and control processes since
the 1960s. The latter are gaining a new dimension of significance in the
digital transformation where they are widespread introduced in
production-organisational processes _between companies_.  This also
influences the structure of management processes. Moreover, this requires the
development of common conceptual systems, at least in areas that are linked by
common supply chains.

Accordingly, management theories in the 20th century focused on different
focal points. Taylor's "Scientific Management" (1911) is still entirely under
the impression of the principal possibilities of large-scale machine
production on a "scientific" basis and directs its focus above all to the
preparation of the worker for such an industrial process, which is driven in
its descriptive form by "one clever head" but (still) requires "a thousand
hands" for practical realisation.

Even in such an algorithmisation of production, as is well known, the devil is
in the detail. In computer science, the difference between abstract high-level
language programmes (up to generative programming) and their implementation in
machine code is well known and has been the subject of a lengthy development
process. Everything remains relatively simple as long as the computer program
does not leave the computer as runtime environment and produces at most
figures on the screen. The story becomes more difficult when the algorithm has
to control and manage real-world processes.

The story also becomes more difficult when the algorithm leaves the
single-user computer built according to von Neumann principles and starts to
make programmes interact in a distributed environment. Ackoff's "Interactive
Planning" addresses the algorithmisation of production processes in such
distributed structures.

However, the dependencies and interaction of actors in _multi-stakeholder
contexts_ can no longer be captured in a mechanical-algorithmic concept.
"Agent-based programming" in complex authorisation and mediation structures
are developed, in which the individual "agents" operate as actors, each with
its own _fictions_, i.e. abbreviated ways of speaking about "social normality"
that is produced by others of the involved actors. In addition to the goals
and interests of the actors, the _mastery of means_ moves further into the
foreground becoming a limiting factor and at the same time a trigger for
further systemic differentiation.

Ackoff's self-similar approach of "Systemic Thinking" should not be
misunderstood as conceptualising a "system of systems" as a "supersystem".
The "system of systems" is reduced in its descriptive dimension, also in
Ackoff's case, to the interaction of the subsystems as _working units_, while
in the descriptions of the subsystems their _functioning_ in the sense of a
means perspective is in the foreground. The forms of description themselves
use different conceptual systems on both levels and thus ultimately also
different languages. Both forms of description meet only in the _interaction
of a real-world practice_, which, however, also _structures itself
systemically_ under the influence of systemic planning - proven thoughts
solidify in systemic structures that can be reused as templates. This is part
of the feedback loop between justified expectations and experienced results.
Ackoff's proposal is therefore to concentrate the development of new systemic
boundaries in the description form along the narrower contexts of practical
cooperation of already established systemic structures that emerge in this
process of experience.  In this way systemic "superstructures" are fixed also
in terms of description which emerge _in practice_ along those boundaries.
That this "superstructure" is by no means a "supersystem", but operates with
other "fictions" as abbreviated ways of speaking than each of the subsystems
was already emphasised above.

Management as problem solving enters precisely this field of _system
formation_ by transforming problems into solutions and thus developing systems
further - from the "system as it is" to the "system as it should be" and
finally to the "system as it has become". Management theories claim to provide
conceptual and methodological tools for this. __Ackoff__ sees a systemically
based methodology as an important general approach to such a task.
__Shchedrovitsky__ develops a conceptual system specifically oriented towards
the manager's field of activity. __Mintzberg__ probably assumes that such a
uniform methodological approach is not possible in view of the structural
diversity of his "basic types" and that at best a toolbox of basic procedures
can be given which can be applied situationally and based on experience.

__Business Process Modelling__, whether in the SMART approach, as a Goal
Model, in MBO or in Business TRIZ, however, assumes that a process-oriented
conceptual system is well suited for modelling business processes and thus
supporting real-world management processes. The focus, however, has always
been on _inner-system interrelationships_. The _throughput_ of material,
energy (including the social energy of real employees) and information
_driving_ the inner system structuring appears in these methodologies in the
term "resource" as an interface. This seems to be a difficult issue because in
the _BPDM glossary_ the term "resource" is used in many places but not
defined. _V. Souchkov_ summarises the term in his glossary as "Any type of
tangible or intangible matter that can be used to solve an inventive problem:
time, space, substances, fields, their properties and parameters, etc." The
_TDS-100 glossary_ only defines the term as "SF resource", but writes about it
in more detail "These are fields, substances, time, space, neutral or harmful
functions and relationships that are available in the system, supersystem,
subsystem and can be used to realise useful functions. For the realisation of
useful functions, derived resources can be used that are formed by
transformation or combination of original resources. Universal resources are
emptiness and periods (pauses) in time. ...".  In any of these definitions,
_resources are given as things ready for use_. Resource production is not addressed. 

However, we have already seen that in the term _resource_ two processes of
different systems are coupled - the _use_ of the provided resource and the
_process of production or reproduction_ of the resource. In the case of "human
resources", the concept of "role" is used, which breaks down into the
sub-processes of "role definition" and "role occupation" as two complex forms
of description with a clearly different focus. Anton Kozhemyako takes up this
question in his text with the terms "generalised object" and "filling" and
follows approaches by Shchedrovitsky. However, the exact modelling in the case
under consideration remains controversial, as does the author's precise
understanding of the relationship between these two terms.

## From the Chat

- How is the concept of organisation related to the previous ones? Formal
  organisation? Living organisation?

- How does the concept of leadership relate to the previous use of the term
  (which was mainly reduced to human resources management)?

- What distinguishes "human resources" from other resources?
  - See also my notes on resources to the last seminar.

- What exactly is meant by schematisation? What is behind the level concept?

- Functional coupling and processual coupling. Coupling as a phenomenon
  _between_ systems?

- How the concepts of _Generalised object_ and _filling_ relate to the problem
  of _resource use_ (in the system) versus _resource provision_ (from another
  system).
