# Seminar on 06 July 2021

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__  Russell Ackoff. Interactive Planning
* __Presenter:__ Daniel Werner

## Abstract

Interactive Planning is a methodology derived by Russel L. Ackoff, in his book
„Creating the Corporate Future: Plan or Be Planned for“ (Wiley, 1981). It is
build upon the basic concept that the future of a company depends on what
actions and events it realizes in the present, aiming towards an ideal future.
Interactive Planning (IP), and trough its execution their planner, wants to
design a desirable present which it then tries to approximate as good as
possible. The approach clearly sees the interdependence of problems and
incorporates this into its planning.  Ackoff based this idea on the ideal of
his so called „Interactivist“ , who wants to actively shape the future of the
organization. The „Interactivist“ accepts that the future cannot be predicted
and planned for in an all-encompassing way.  

## Material

* [Handout](Handout.pdf)
* [Slides](Slides.pdf)

## Notes

In the presentation it became visible that Ackoff's Interactive Planning has a
high affinity to TRIZ concepts and methods. The references to Business TRIZ
need to be explored further, but this is a topic for future seminars, as the
basics of Business TRIZ need to be studied in more detail beforehand.

In my remarks I concentrate on a question that played a subordinate role in
the analysis of management tasks so far: The relationship between _resource
use_ and _resource provision_.

Let me start first with a relation of this problem to the context of the
conceptual system developed in the lecture. A central question was "What does
it mean to change a world that is itself also constantly changing?"  This can
only mean _to influence_ the development of the world. But why influence the
development of the world? Because world development is problematic. Management
therefore means to solve problems. Where there are no problems, there is no
need for management. The solution of problems is preceded by their
delimitation and analysis. In a systemic context, this is done by internal
demarcation of elements, external demarcation of the system against an
environment and reducing the relationships between the elements to essential
ones.

A systemic approach thus assumes that a contextually delimited area is
accessible to description as a white box and thus to management. Management in
this understanding is an _internal function_ of the system, which in the TRIZ
context is assigned to the control component of the system. In this context,
the _interaction_ of the various systemic resources must be organised.
Resources appear conceptually in TRIZ under various names - as components,
tools, processed objects, etc. What all these resources have in common is that
they appear in the system with a functionally (components and tools) or
structurally (processed object as preliminary product) significant role, but
the _reproduction_ of these resources takes place in neighbouring systems.

In this sense, components are also neighbouring systems rather than
subsystems, because the emergent properties of a system result from the
_interaction_ of the component properties. Since only the _interfaces_ of the
components are accessed here, components thus appear as a black box just like
the services of neighbouring systems in the environment. While an immersive
system approach makes a clear distinction here between "inside" and "outside",
this looks different in a submersive system approach - a component appears in
the system as a _reference_ to the implementation of its functionality, as do
services from neighbouring systems. A similar conceptual arrangement is known
from the theory of Component Software.

Thus in a systemic context _resource use_ and _resource reproduction_ are in a
contradictory relationship, since both occur in different systems. For
resource utilisation, the interface to which the resource couples must be
described in more detail. Since a system description is always a reduction to
essentials, this interface description can and must work with a _fiction_ in
the sense of the lecture - an abbreviated way of speaking about a social
normality. In a world organised by division of labour, this production of
normality as a reproduction of resources is outsourced to another systemic
context.

The central resource in cross-system socio-technical processes is the human
being. Resource description and resource reproduction are found here as _role
description_ and _role occupation_. A contradiction is expressed when no
suitable candidates are found to fill a role. Approaches such as Management by
Incentive or Management by Objective completely ignore these questions and
assume that sufficient qualified personnel are available. F. Taylor's
Scientific Management included a qualification programme for appropriate role
appointments, which is still significant today in the concept of Trainee
programmes. However, even then this approach only worked for unskilled and
semi-skilled workers, but not for high qualified technical personnel.

What has been explained here for human resources also applies to other
resources. A system that consumes a certain resource depends on the provision
and thus reproduction of this resource, which corresponds to a coupling of two
systems. The contradictory nature of the description form results from the
fact that in each of the two perspectives the other system is seen as a black
box. This leads to inconsistencies in the coupling of justified expectations
and experienced results in the common execution form.

Although in the Toyota system such interfaces are considered in more detail,
the question remains open how exactly the contradictions of a "Just in Time"
are processed. The approach to provide "the right thing at the right time in
the right quality" propagates a push concept and externalises the
responsibility for solving the mentioned contradiction to the system of
resource reproduction. However, this system is dependent on a certain external
throughput in order to function adequately. The question how the
resource-consuming system affects this systemic existence condition remains
open in the Toyota system approach. The overarching principle of the
coordination of cooperative action is the push principle, according to which
everything happens "by itself".

Ackoff's approach of Interactive Planning moves a step further and formulates
the coordination problem at least as a planning problem. From a systemic point
of view, the contradiction of resource mediation can only be solved in a
further system whose emergent function is to secure precisely this resource
mediation. In an immersive system approach, such a system would be called an
supersystem. In a submersive systems approach, however, this system stands
alongside the systems it connects, because it has to fulfill a _specific_ task
that has to do with the _functioning_ of the subsystems and to a less extend
with their _function_.

Management in this sense therefore does not only mean leadership as a personal
characteristic or control as a functional component of a system, but is a
central element of system development itself.

##  From the Chat

Graebe, Hans-Gert :

- We learned so far about an exciting diversity of approaches to management
  - Management by incentive, by objective which is primarily directes at
    management of people (management = leadership?)  
  -  Business Process Modelling is gaining more and more importance.
  - Here with Ackoff more precise process-analytical and
    process-organisational concepts, in which leadership is hardly in the
    (primary) focus, but the concept does not stop at the modelling level but
    is also about implementation of the model in reality.

- How are these changes of the focus of management theory to be evaluated and
  at what are their turning points in time?

- How does Ackoff understand approximation _as a process_?
  - Kleemann : I would be interested in the way or rather the way of dealing
    with iteration.

- "Ideal future" - how does this relate to the concept of the "ideal end
  result" in TRIZ?

- What do "bottom-up" and "top-down" mean from a systemic point of view?

- Problem of eliminating undesirable effects leads to further harmful effects.
  This is very well known from TRIZ, where this phenomenon is approached
  systematically.

- _Interactivist_ - connection to the feeedback circle "reasonable
  expectations -> experienced results" from the lecture. (Principle of
  Continuity)

- Principle of Participation: Building a Cooperative World View

- Holistic Principle: Which level concept does play a role there?

- Idealisation and Realisation - parallels to Design Thinking?

- _The Mess_ - phase of delimiting the system (in our understanding of system
  as "reduction to essentials", the Mess is _not_ "the system", but "reality",
  which, however, can only be grasped linguistically).

- Obstruction Analysis - is precisely analysis of contradictions. Are there
  several analytical levels of contradiction analysis here as in the phase
  model of TRIZ (or the path model of ProHEAL)?
  - ProHEAL: <https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:bsz:15-qucosa2-749491>

- How algorithmically detailed is the analysis phase (which corresponds to
  modelling).

- Reference scenario: In ProHEAL there are the terms "base variant" and
  "reference variant".

- Shocking reference scenario: Corresponds to the mental variation of the
  action parameters in TRIZ up to their limits and beyond.

- On what happened to Bell and AT&T in the 1950s.
  - <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AT%26T_Communications_Inc.>
  - <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bell_System>

- "Three parts" - is exactly what TRIZ also calls for in the modelling phase:
  1) PNF as external "usefulness" of the system as a black box for other
     systems.
  2) Structural organisation of the system as a white box (The "machine" in
     the TRIZ trainer).
  3) "How the machine works" (which has subsequently to be implemented).

- Management: Is this only about the control component of the system,
  i.e. management as a _function_, or also about the qualities of the managers
  with whom the positions are to be filled? Problem of the principle of single
  management (often depends more on the person than on the authorisation of
  the role).  Consultants - this means stregthening management as a
  _function_.

- Personnel: This is about personnel development as a system _different_ from
  the system of operative production.  What are the coupling points between
  the two systems? In general: (description of) resource requirements (in one
  system) and (real) provision of the resource (by another system).  The
  latter requires (re)production of the resource itself.

- What are _gaps_ in this notion? Do contradictions always appear as gaps? Or
  are gaps the gaps in the model yet to be filled?

- "Disruptive approach" - the problem is that planning itself must be
  understood as a development process. SCRUM comes much closer to this. But
  this is also a problem of TRIZ (less so, as technical systems have a
  different development dynamic than social systems) and Business TRIZ, and
  perhaps also of ProHEAL (at least according to a comment by A. Solodkin).

Veronika Heuten : My question would be whether Ackoff developed the theory
via observation or did he put it all down on paper theoretically? I have the
impression that here again a lot is about feeling, intuition and experience.

- HGG: Although most of his concepts are strongly based on experience Ackoff
  developed his theoretical ideas in the 1970s under the influence of
  cybernetics and under the preception wide spread at that time that computers
  and information processing pave the way to a society of command and control.
- This had a great influence even on the development of professional profiles,
  in West and East, for example
  <https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Facharbeiter_f%C3%BCr_BMSR-Technik>
- Such dreams of a completely plannable production exist and there were even
  attempts to implement that in certain regions of the world.
  - <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_Cybersyn>
  - <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socialism_of_the_21st_century>
  - <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heinz_Dieterich>
  - <https://www.designing-history.world/en/theory/simulating-socialism-1/>
- However, it was also fundamentally criticised
  - Joseph Weizenbaum: Computer Power and Human Reason.
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_Power_and_Human_Reason> 
  - Donna Haraway: A Cyborg Manifesto.
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Cyborg_Manifesto>