# Seminar on 11 May 2021

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__  Russell Ackoff. System Thinking and Management
* __Presenter:__ Jannis de Riz

## Abstract

The aim of the seminar is to gain a more detailed understanding of the concept
of systems and basic approaches of Russell L. Ackoff's management theory, the
main features of which were developed in the early 1970s.

## Material

* [Handout](Handout.pdf) 
* [Slides](Slides.pdf) 

## Notes

In the seminar it became clear that Ackoff's systems theoretical approaches to
management theory date back to the 1970s and are strongly influenced by the
developments at that time, especially in cybernetics. With the availability of
the first computers at that time, questions of _control theory_ were newly
discussed, which in the pre-computer age could often only be solved by
filigree mechanical constructions such as the pressure regulator on steam
engines, the clock pendulum, etc. The computer opened up completely new
dimensions of management and control through data collected and processed at
the right time, even though technology at that time was still far from being
able to realise the mature theoretical concepts that had already been
conceived. The roots also reach far back into the first decades of the 20th
century to the beginnings of _assembly line_ production, the associated
standardisation of operating procedures and the possibilities and realisation
of a parallel emerging _automation technology_.  In the cybernetics wave of
the 1960s, practical applications of control circuits in various domains
played an important role, right up to the ["skilled worker for BMSR
technology"](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Facharbeiter_f%C3%BCr_BMSR-Technik)
as a newly emerging profession in the GDR economy. So much about the
background of Ackoff's theoretical approaches. See also (Steinbuch 1966),
(Steinbuch 1971) or (Prigogine/Stengers 1981).

It is interesting to note the extensive convergence of Ackoff's concept of
system with those introduced earlier, but also their differences. Ackoff, too,
sees the constitutive property of a system in the interaction of its
components and the emergent functionality resulting from it. This phenomenon,
which is also called _synergy_, leads from concurrency and, in the worst case,
opposition of the components to a cooperation. In contrast to TRIZ, where the
creation of such a cooperation is a constructive engineering achievement,
Ackoff takes up the idea with the concepts of organismic and social systems
that such _synergetic_ or _symbiotic_ (as a higher form of synergy)
structuring phenomena also occur "spontaneously" and without "constructive"
intention under natural-biological (organismic) or socio-cultural conditions
of humans' co-operate actions. In the field of management, especially
systematic management, the idea then arises to influence such "natural"
processes also in _socio-economic systems_, namely in _organisations_, in
order to push them in a certain direction through active management action
(ultimately in a technical understanding of "social engineering").

An essential contradiction arose from the attempt to gain influence on
systemic processes with such individual management action, the emergent
character of which had just been postulated, i.e. which precisely does _not_
develop from the influence of one component alone, even if it is at the top of
a management hierarchy and concentrates great decision-making powers in its
hands.

* Ilya Prigogine, Isabelle Stengers. Dialog mit der Natur. Piper, MÃ¼nchen 1981. 
* Karl Steinbuch. Die informierte Gesellschaft. Stuttgart 1966.
* Karl Steinbuch. Automat und Mensch. Springer, Berlin 1971

##  From the Chat

- Kleemann : For the discussion: First, the problem of transferring biological
  categories to system considerations. Secondly, the problem of purpose
  itself: evolution is not optimisation. Thirdly, pattern formation in chaotic
  systems as non-goal-directed developments.

- Kleemann : does such a management lead to a rather pyramidal hierarchy?

- Veronika Heuten : Can we talk again about open and closed systems? Why is an
  organic system open?

Graebe, Hans-Gert :

- Is there a "holistic approach" or is every "holistic" approach also
  reductionist?

- "The brain" - works like that in all cases (hearing, seeing ...), but does
  that have anything to do with a systemic approach or rather with context
  embedding?  Or are they synonymous?

- Ackoff's concept of system is largely the same as TRIZ's, but he looks "from
  the inside out", while TRIZ (and engineers) look "from the outside in"?

- Are there "closed" mechanical systems? The car also has to be refuelled
  again and again, once a year go for a check-up, etc.

- Shchedrovitsky distinguishes "constructed" systems and "living" systems, but
  his approach is different - as soon as a constructed system is put into
  operation, then it turns into a living system, and the system parameters, up
  to and including the "purpose" (Ackoff), change.

- Definition of "management" - how does this fit with Shchedrovitsky's
  approach? Especially his sentence "You can only manage something that is in
  motion". He also discusses a "car example".

- View of (entrepreneurial) system as "mechanical", "organismic", "social"
  runs parallel to the unfolding of both technology and capitalist forms of
  enterprise.  What are the causal connections?  "Thinking organismically" ->
  "creating stock corporation" or vice versa? And how is the turn to "social"
  to be understood? New socio-economic forms? Is this driven by the (also
  investive) demands of technology?

- How are the concepts "enterprise as a social system", "technical ecosystems"
  and the increasingly important concept of "socio-ecological systems" related
  to each other?

- What does the (by Ackoff) higher valued state intervention mean under these
  new conditions of production?  This is in complete contradiction to
  neoliberal approaches that were dominant for 40 years. Ackoff (1972) - the
  40 years of neoliberalism came afterwards.

- Analysis - Synthesis. With M. Rubin: analysis - synthesis - evaluation as a
  triangle.  Rubin sees this as a cycle A -> S -> E -> A ...

- However, analysis and synthesis are understood differently there, not
  analysis = from the whole to the parts, synthesis = from the parts to the
  whole, but in both cases it is about _the same_ system.

- Dissoultion = that which constitutes the contradiction approach of TRIZ.  It
  is about a solution of contradictons that is "better than the optimum" ever
  can be, namely beyond the "Pareto boundary".

- Daniel Werner : Analogous to thermodynamics: Just as a perpetuum mobile
  (closed system without energy exchange with the environment) is impossible
  to realise, according to Shchedrowitsky, management without movement is also
  impossible.

- Kleemann : that's ok: purpose as cooperative organisational interaction. 

- Daniel Werner : So Ackoff or the theory (from the 1970s) is only a child of
  his time. At that time Darwinism was still a contemporary view of evolution.

- Kleemann : clearly no reproach in this sense. Yes it is a child of its time,
  but today we know that biological reproduction is no unfolding of
  blueprints, but adaptation, selection, mutation; organism does not develop
  in environment, but reciprocally; accordingly chaotic movement and
  nevertheless pattern formation are not linear, therefore other conception of
  system (submersive vs. immersive system notion) are needed, and other
  management methods -- flexible, mobile and flat hierarchicies.

- Kleemann : Dennett once said it nicely: the classical conception is a
  trickle down, evolution and chaos theory are bubbling up.

- Graebe, Hans-Gert : What is "public ownership"?

- Graebe, Hans-Gert : Who makes decisions in companies? Management or owners?
