# Seminar on 18 May 2021

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__  MBO &ndash; Management by Objectives
* __Presenter:__ Franziska GÃ¶rg

## Abstract

Due to the increasing complexity of markets, structures and processes, new
management methods have been developed in the 20th century.  _Management
principles_ serve to maintain a uniform line in the management of employees.
Among these, "management-by" techniques exist, such as the "management by
objectives" (MBO) management tool.

By setting principles for management behavior, it is possible to systematize
corporate management and ensure a way of controlling corporate processes while
at the same time meeting the expectations of the company and its employees.

In the strategic management model "Management by Objectives" developed by
Peter F. Drucker in the 1950s, the focus is on the cooperative development and
agreement of objectives by the manager and the employees in order to improve
the performance of the organization.

## Material

* [Handout](Handout.pdf)
* [Slides](Slides.pdf)  

## Notes

In contrast to Management by Incentives (MBI), which is primarily oriented
towards the activation of forces of self-control, Management by Objectives
(MBO) focuses on controlling the implementation of objectives in the
combination of planning and monitoring.

The unit of implementation is again thought systemically as a delimitable and
delimited management unit with an externally given objective (target), i.e. it
can be interpreted in the context of our system concept. However, this system
concept provides for the functioning of such a system unit in addition to the
target the organisation of a corresponding _resource throughput_, without
which a real world system cannot function. This aspect remained underexposed
in the presented MBO concept.

In contrast to MBI, which (implicitly) assumes a comfortable throughput and
asks which incentive systems can be used to stimulate the system's internal
self-organisation and self-structuring forces, MBO takes a much more
structured approach. The _objective_ as an external, unquestioned requirement
is detailed in and by the systemic structural unit into an action plan, which
consists of individual _activities_ that are linked to each other via _work
products_ as output and subsequent input, which must be produced on time and
in quality and are subjected to quality assurance (QA) at milestones. This QA
is carried out against quality measures that can be product- or
process-related and form the basis for progress control.

This remains also within the framework of our system concept, which provides
precisely such a white box analysis of structural and process organisation of
the system. In addition to the flow of substance and energy between the
activities, the instrumentation with quality measures also initiates an _flow
of information_ in the system, which, however, remains unspecified - beyond
the SMART requirement - and was only addressed in the role of a management
instrument. This corresponds quite well with the TRIZ systematics, when flows
of substance and energy as well as actions of tools on objects (in the
activities) are described in more detail, but the control structure as another
component of the system still remain hidden.

The systemic self-similarity structure of the approach remained underexposed,
but immediately emerges when the systemic "white box" - "black box" principle
developed in the lecture is applied to the action plans as a
component-container pattern. The _action plan_ as a systemic "white box"
contains _activities_ as systemic "black box" components that enter the
planning solely through their IO characteristics. For the overall process, the
components must function at runtime in accordance with their specification
assuming the throughput required for this is guaranteed. However, this
throughput is guaranteed by the scheduled provision of the required work
products by other components (activities). This organisational principle can
be repeated at the activity level, but also at the level of the strategic
interaction of the different action plans at the enterprise level. Multi-level
hierarchical management systems can be built according to this principle of
action planning, which will mainly differ in the eigentimes of the built-in
evaluation cycles. Action planning at different levels does not necessarily
have to follow the same rules.

Problems in such a system, which can be recognised via the reports on process
parameters informally passed on to the (human) control component (a TRIZ
system concept), are processed in this control component into a process
modification output, insofar as tolerances in the system (more precisely: in
the system description) allow this. Such problems can therefore be compensated
within the system itself. If the problems exceed the self-regulation capacity
of the system, they must be propagated to the upper system. Such regulation
processes are bound to managers and responsibilities.  The abilities,
competencies, skills and formal requirements for occupying such a position are
fixed in the corresponding _role definition_. At runtime of the system, the
_role-adequate staffing_ of this post, is part of the "throughput" to be
guaranteed so that the system can function.

The _control component_ of the system - in the simplest case given by the
responsible manager - is thus at the same time its "brain", which holds a
description (a picture) of the system and regularly updates it via the
incoming information (the "sensors" of the system), which forms the basis of
the control (the "management") of the system. The difference between the
dynamics of the real system and the dynamics of this image of the system must
be distinguished.

In this understanding, management means _exerting influence on the
self-movement_ of the system (Shchedrovitsky: "You can only manage something
that is in motion.") Therefore, not only a metabolism of substance and energy
must be organised in the system, but also a metabolism of information. This
information turnover serves to process the difference between description and
reality of the system dynamics.

What remains problematic about the whole approach is the basically sacrosanct
_objective_, which leads to a rigid hierarchical management structure. Such a
structure has the advantage of exploiting local compensation potentials to the
maximum in order to limit necessary system adjustments to the lowest possible
components. Also, cumbersome feedback structures lead to inadequate objectives
being recognised late and wrongly assigned to responsibilities. Comprehensive
systemic reorganisations require a significant deviation from its regular
operations and thus a considerable use of resources. In companies organised in
this way, they can usually only be implemented with massive support from
strategic management.

Further flexibility is achieved above all when action plans are built up from
company-wide mandatory parameterised process modules that can be adapted
(taylored) to concrete application scenarios, thus systematising company-wide
project experience (CMMI maturity level 3 "defined"). Uniformly instrumented
process modules of this kind also allow the establishment of a company-wide
"brain" for such management experiences (CMMI maturity level 4 "quantitatively
managed"). For both approaches, however, a "system of systems" needs to be
developed that integrates the action planning systems into a company-wide
systemic framework at a higher level of abstraction.

##  From the Chat

Graebe, Hans-Gert:

- New image of man. What is the connection to technological developments,
  especially cybernetics?

- Generality of self-control and self-initiative - does this mean that every
  employee becomes a manager?
  - Jannis de Riz : At this point I would refer to the management definition
    on the German Wikipedia page, according to which every employee would also
    be a manager.
  - "Labour no longer appears so much to be included within the production
    process; rather, the human being comes to relate more as watchman and
    regulator to the production process itself."
    ([Marx](https://thenewobjectivity.com/pdf/marx.pdf))
  - "Macht, was ihr wollt, aber seid profitabel" (Do what you want, but be
    profitable) <https://www.grin.com/document/125561>

- Slide 3: What is the connection between management, formal organisation and
  resources?

- Analysis: target-actual state, planning. Where do the target expectations
  come from?
  - Slide 4: This is a functional property of the "management body".
  - Slide 8: "Management supports the management strategy". Hence there are
    external objectives also for the "management body".

- Management body: Shchedrovitsky addresses the contradiction between the
  subsystem of the management body and the subsystem in which the manager is
  the boss.
  - The "management body" as structural component ("institutional sense") is
    also present in slide 4 but this contradiction is not further
    problematised.

- 5 steps MBO model: Analysis and evaluation occur, but not synthesis.
  Ackoff: A - S without E, Rubin: A -> S -> E -> A ...
  - Rubin addresses evaluation within the system.  Here (slide 10,11)
    evaluation is only for the components (i.e. the action plans), not for the
    control system (the management body) itself.

- Slide 9: How does _goal setting_ work against the _requirements_ associated
  with the place. What is the concept of place vs. staffing (as it is central
  in the _role concept_ of computer science)? How to ensure that suitable
  resources are available at the right time to fill the place (the concept of
  role can easily be extended to all possible resources).
  - Remains largely open.
  - Slide 9: "Personnel Requirements. Qualification, self-efficacy
    expectations, goal commitment, feedback, task complexity, general
    conditions". - all this is given. 

- Slide 11: Structuring the actions according to a phase model, as we have
  come to know it in process models such as CMMI or the process model of ISO
  9000, does not play a role here? But SMART does go in this direction? Action
  is what is called "activity" today? But milestones have a clearly different
  meaning today.  "Action" as a self-similar structuring unit of business
  processes?
  - See my notes above.

- Relation between manager and employee.
  - Slide 16: How should I imagine this - boss and subordinate communicating
    "at equals", especially in contradictory constellations? Or are there no
    contradictions in the whole system?
  - Slide 18: Is "the goal was achieved" also negotiated between boss and
    subordinate "at equals"?
  - Not clear at all. The relation manager - employee is highly asymmetric in
    all the construction.

- How does the approach deal with the resource problem? In a systemic
  approach, the resource throughput - the time-critical provision of the
  "throughput" - is one of the central variables that can be influenced by the
  system itself only to a limited extent. The throughput must be guaranteed by
  the supersystem.
  - Not addressed in the presentation and the discussion. 

- Slide 21: CMMI knows "key practices" and "key process areas" to focus on the
  improvement of capability and maturity. Maturity seems to play no role at
  all in MBO?
  - Not addressed in the presentation and the discussion. 

- Slide 22: Clear connection to SCRUM. However, SCRUM works on a much
  different basis.
  - Not addressed in the presentation and the discussion. 

- Slide 23: OKR, how do you secure the "old values" of planning, management,
  control within the "new values" flexibility, creativity, collaboration?

More comments:

- Daniel Werner : Slide 9: Are the "stable factors" really that stable once
  the activities have been assigned?
  - Aren't characteristics such as motivation even more dependent on daily
    form than, for example, qualification, as soon as the respective
    activities have been assigned to an employee?

- Veronika Heuten : There are different types of incentives that work
  extrinsically or intrinsically. So I wouldn't call these two methods (MBO
  vs. MBI) two different poles.

- Daniel Werner : So milestone is a subset of activity and activity is a
  subset of actions?
  - See the notes above. Milestones are the nodes in the activity graph, where
    the work products are accepted as output of one activity and released as
    input for a subsequent activity.  At milestones QA activities on work
    products are carried out.    
  - As far a I interpreted it, _action_ is a white box view on a system,
    _activity_ is called "component" in a systemic approach and hence is an
    "action" considered as black box (or, at least, could be considered in
    such a way).